1979 : Soviet deployment The Afghan government , having secured a treaty in December 1978 that allowed them to call on Soviet forces , repeatedly requested the introduction of troops in Afghanistan in the spring and summer of 1979 .
They requested Soviet troops to provide security and to assist in the fight against the mujahideen rebels .
On April 14 , 1979 , the Afghan government requested that the USSR send 15 to 20 helicopters with their crews to Afghanistan , and on June 16 , the Soviet government responded and sent a detachment of tanks , BMPs , and crews to guard the government in Kabul and to secure the Bagram and Shindand airfields .
In response to this request , an airborne battalion , commanded by Lieutenant Colonel A. Lomakin , arrived at the Bagram Air Base on July 7 .
They arrived without their combat gear , disguised as technical specialists .
They were the personal bodyguards for President Taraki .
The paratroopers were directly subordinate to the senior Soviet military advisor and did not interfere in Afghan politics .
After a month , the Afghan requests were no longer for individual crews and subunits , but for regiments and larger units .
In July , the Afghan government requested that two motorized rifle divisions be sent to Afghanistan .
The following day , they requested an airborne division in addition to the earlier requests .
They repeated these requests and variants to these requests over the following months right up to December 1979 .
However , the Soviet government was in no hurry to grant them .
The anti communist rebels garnered support from the United States .
As stated by the former director of the Central Intelligence Agency and current US Secretary of Defense , Robert Gates , in his memoirs From the Shadows , the US intelligence services began to aid the rebel factions in Afghanistan six months before the Soviet deployment .
On July 3 , 1979 , US President Jimmy Carter signed an executive order authorizing the CIA to conduct covert propaganda operations against the communist regime .
Carter advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski stated : `` According to the official version of history , CIA aid to the mujahideen began during 1980 , that is to say , after the Soviet army invaded Afghanistan , December 24 , 1979 .
But the reality , secretly guarded until now , is completely otherwise . ''
Brzezinski himself played a fundamental role in crafting US policy , which , unbeknownst even to the mujahideen , was part of a larger strategy `` to induce a Soviet military intervention . ''
In a 1998 interview with Le Nouvel Observateur , Brzezinski recalled : `` We did n't push the Russians to intervene , but we knowingly increased the probability that they would ... That secret operation was an excellent idea .
It had the effect of drawing the Soviets into the Afghan trap ... The day that the Soviets officially crossed the border , I wrote to President Carter .
We now have the opportunity of giving to the Soviet Union its Vietnam War . ''
Additionally , on July 3 , 1979 , Carter signed a presidential finding authorizing funding for anticommunist guerrillas in Afghanistan .
As a part of the Central Intelligence Agency program Operation Cyclone , the massive arming of Afghanistan 's mujahideen was started .
Based on information from the KGB , Soviet leaders felt that Amin destabilized the situation in Afghanistan .
Following Amin 's initial coup against and killing of President Taraki , the KGB station in Kabul warned that his leadership would lead to `` harsh repressions , and as a result , the activation and consolidation of the opposition . ''
The Soviets established a special commission on Afghanistan , of KGB chairman Yuri Andropov , Boris Ponomarev from the Central Committee and Dmitry Ustinov , the Minister of Defense .
In late April 1978 , they reported that Amin was purging his opponents , including Soviet loyalists ; his loyalty to Moscow was in question ; and that he was seeking diplomatic links with Pakistan and possibly the People 's Republic of China .
Of specific concern were Amin 's secret meetings with the US chargé d'affaires J. Bruce Amstutz , which , while never amounting to any agreement between Amin and the United States , sowed suspicion in the Kremlin .
Information obtained by the KGB from its agents in Kabul provided the last arguments to eliminate Amin .
Supposedly , two of Amin 's guards killed the former president Nur Muhammad Taraki with a pillow , and Amin was suspected to be a CIA agent .
The latter , however , is still disputed : Amin repeatedly demonstrated official friendliness to the Soviet Union .
Soviet General Vasily Zaplatin , a political advisor at that time , claimed that four of President Taraki 's ministers were responsible for the destabilization .
However , Zaplatin failed to emphasize this enough .
Also during the 1970s , the Soviet Union reached the peak of its political influence in comparison to the U.S. as the SALT I treaty was created to cooperate in matters of nuclear weapons and technology between the two nations .
A second round of talks between communist leader Brezhnev and president Carter yielded the SALT II treaty in June 1979 , which the U.S. Senate though , failed to ratify .
This process would eventually culminate and lead up to the buildup and invasion of Afghanistan in December 1979 to preserve , stabilize and militarily intervene on behalf of the communist regime there .
1979 : Soviet invasion On December 7 , 1979 , Soviet informants to the Afghan Armed Forces who were under orders from the inner circle of advisors under Soviet leader Brezhnev , relayed information for them to undergo maintenance cycles for their tanks and other crucial equipment .
Meanwhile , telecommunications links to areas outside of Kabul were severed , isolating the capital .
With a deteriorating security situation , large numbers of Soviet airborne forces joined stationed ground troops and began to land in Kabul on December 25 .
Simultaneously , Amin moved the offices of the president to the Tajbeg Palace , believing this location to be more secure from possible threats .
According to Colonel General Tukharinov and Merimsky , Amin was fully informed of the military movements , having requested Soviet military assistance to northern Afghanistan on December 17 .
His brother and General Dmitry Chiangov met with the commander of the 40th Army before Soviet troops entered the country , to work out initial routes and locations for Soviet troops .
On December 27 , 1979 , 700 Soviet troops dressed in Afghan uniforms , including KGB and GRU special force officers from the Alpha Group and Zenith Group , occupied major governmental , military and media buildings in Kabul , including their primary target the Tajbeg Presidential Palace .
That operation began at 19:00 hr. , when the Soviet Zenith Group destroyed Kabul 's communications hub , paralyzing Afghan military command .
At 19:15 , the assault on Tajbeg Palace began ; as planned , president Hafizullah Amin was killed .
Simultaneously , other objectives were occupied -LRB- e.g. the Ministry of Interior at 19:15 -RRB- .
The operation was fully complete by the morning of December 28 , 1979 .
The Soviet military command at Termez , Uzbek SSR , announced on Radio Kabul that Afghanistan had been `` liberated '' from Amin 's rule .
According to the Soviet Politburo they were complying with the 1978 Treaty of Friendship , Cooperation and Good Neighborliness and Amin had been `` executed by a tribunal for his crimes '' by the Afghan Revolutionary Central Committee .
That committee then elected as head of government former Deputy Prime Minister Babrak Karmal , who had been demoted to the relatively insignificant post of ambassador to Czechoslovakia following the Khalq takeover , and that it had requested Soviet military assistance .
Soviet ground forces , under the command of Marshal Sergei Sokolov , entered Afghanistan from the north on December 27 .
In the morning , the 103rd Guards ` Vitebsk ' Airborne Division landed at the airport at Bagram and the deployment of Soviet troops in Afghanistan was underway .
The force that entered Afghanistan , in addition to the 103rd Guards Airborne Division , was under command of the 40th Army and consisted of the 108th and 5th Guards Motor Rifle Divisions , the 860th Separate Motor Rifle Regiment , the 56th Separate Airborne Assault Brigade , the 36th Mixed Air Corps .
Later on the 201st and 58th Motor Rifle Divisions also entered the country , along with other smaller units .
In all , the initial Soviet force was around 1,800 tanks , 80,000 soldiers and 2,000 AFVs .
In the second week alone , Soviet aircraft had made a total of 4,000 flights into Kabul .
With the arrival of the two later divisions , the total Soviet force rose to over 100,000 personnel .
December 1979 February 1980 : Occupation The first phase began with the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and their first battles with various opposition groups .
Soviet troops entered Afghanistan along two ground routes and one air corridor , quickly taking control of the major urban centers , military bases and strategic installations .
However , the presence of Soviet troops did not have the desired effect of pacifying the country .
On the contrary , it exacerbated a nationalistic feeling , causing the rebellion to spread even more .
Babrak Karmal , Afghanistan 's new president , charged the Soviets with causing an increase in the unrest , and demanded that the 40th Army step in and quell the rebellion , as his own army had proved untrustworthy .
Thus , Soviet troops found themselves drawn into fighting against urban uprisings , tribal armies -LRB- called lashkar -RRB- , and sometimes against mutinying Afghan Army units .
These forces mostly fought in the open , and Soviet airpower and artillery made short work of them .
March 1980 April 1985 : Soviet offensives The war now developed into a new pattern : the Soviets occupied the cities and main axis of communication , while the mujahideen , divided into small groups , waged a guerrilla war .
Almost 80 percent of the country escaped government control .
Soviet troops were deployed in strategic areas in the northeast , especially along the road from Termez to Kabul .
In the west , a strong Soviet presence was maintained to counter Iranian influence .
Conversely , some regions such as Nuristan and Hazarajat were virtually untouched by the fighting , and lived in almost complete independence .
Periodically the Soviet Army undertook multi divisional offensives into mujahideen controlled areas .
Between 1980 and 1985 , nine offensives were launched into the strategically important Panjshir Valley , but government control of the area did not improve .
Heavy fighting also occurred in the provinces neighbouring Pakistan , where cities and government outposts were constantly under siege by the mujahideen .
Massive Soviet operations would regularly break these sieges , but the mujahideen would return as soon as the coast was clear .
In the west and south , fighting was more sporadic , except in the cities of Herat and Kandahar , that were always partly controlled by the resistance .
On his arrival in power in March 1985 , the new Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev expressed his impatience with the Afghan conflict .
He demanded that a solution be found before a one year deadline .
As a result , the size of the LCOSF -LRB- Limited Contingent of Soviet Forces -RRB- was increased to 108,800 and fighting increased throughout the country , making 1985 the bloodiest year of the war .
However , despite suffering heavily , the mujahideen were able to remain in the field and continue resisting the Soviets .
1980s : Insurrection In the mid 1980s , the Afghan resistance movement , assisted by the United States , Pakistan , Saudi Arabia , the United Kingdom , PRC and others , contributed to Moscow 's high military costs and strained international relations .
The US viewed the conflict in Afghanistan as an integral Cold War struggle , and the CIA provided assistance to anti Soviet forces through the Pakistani intelligence services , in a program called Operation Cyclone .
A similar movement occurred in other Muslim countries , bringing contingents of so called Afghan Arabs , foreign fighters who wished to wage jihad against the atheist communists .
Notable among them was a young Saudi named Osama bin Laden , whose Arab group eventually evolved into al Qaeda .
In the course of the guerrilla war , leadership came to be distinctively associated with the title of `` commander '' .
It applied to independent leaders , eschewing identification with elaborate military bureaucracy associated with such ranks as general .
As the war produced leaders of reputation , `` commander '' was conferred on leaders of fighting units of all sizes , signifying pride in independence , self sufficiency , and distinct ties to local communities .
The title epitomized Afghan pride in their struggle against a powerful foe .
Segmentation of power and religious leadership were the two values evoked by nomenclature generated in the war .
Neither had been favored in the ideology of the former Afghan state .
Afghanistan 's resistance movement was born in chaos , spread and triumphed chaotically , and did not find a way to govern differently .
Virtually all of its war was waged locally by regional warlords .
As warfare became more sophisticated , outside support and regional coordination grew .
Even so , the basic units of mujahideen organization and action continued to reflect the highly segmented nature of Afghan society .
Olivier Roy estimates that after four years of war , there were at least 4,000 bases from which mujahideen units operated .
Most of these were affiliated with the seven expatriate parties headquartered in Pakistan , which served as sources of supply and varying degrees of supervision .
Significant commanders typically led 300 or more men , controlled several bases and dominated a district or a sub division of a province .
Hierarchies of organization above the bases were attempted .
Their operations varied greatly in scope , the most ambitious being achieved by Ahmad Shah Massoud of the Panjshir valley north of Kabul .
He led at least 10,000 trained troops at the end of the Soviet war and had expanded his political control of Tajik dominated areas to Afghanistan 's northeastern provinces under the Supervisory Council of the North .
Roy also describes regional , ethnic and sectarian variations in mujahideen organization .
In the Pashtun areas of the east , south and southwest , tribal structure , with its many rival sub divisions , provided the basis for military organization and leadership .
Mobilization could be readily linked to traditional fighting allegiances of the tribal lashkar -LRB- fighting force -RRB- .
In favorable circumstances such formations could quickly reach more than 10,000 , as happened when large Soviet assaults were launched in the eastern provinces , or when the mujahideen besieged towns , such as Khost in Paktia province in July 1983 .
But in campaigns of the latter type the traditional explosions of manpower customarily common immediately after the completion of harvest proved obsolete when confronted by well dug in defenders with modern weapons .
Lashkar durability was notoriously short ; few sieges succeeded .
Mujahideen mobilization in non Pashtun regions faced very different obstacles .
Prior to the invasion , few non Pashtuns possessed firearms .
Early in the war they were most readily available from army troops or gendarmerie who defected or were ambushed .
The international arms market and foreign military support tended to reach the minority areas last .
In the northern regions , little military tradition had survived upon which to build an armed resistance .
Mobilization mostly came from political leadership closely tied to Islam .
Roy convincingly contrasts the social leadership of religious figures in the Persian and Turkish speaking regions of Afghanistan with that of the Pashtuns .
Lacking a strong political representation in a state dominated by Pashtuns , minority communities commonly looked to pious learned or charismatically revered pirs -LRB- saints -RRB- for leadership .
Extensive Sufi and maraboutic networks were spread through the minority communities , readily available as foundations for leadership , organization , communication and indoctrination .
These networks also provided for political mobilization , which led to some of the most effective of the resistance operations during the war .
The mujahideen favored sabotage operations .
The more common types of sabotage included damaging power lines , knocking out pipelines and radio stations , blowing up government office buildings , air terminals , hotels , cinemas , and so on .
From 1985 through 1987 , an average of over 600 `` terrorist acts '' a year were recorded .
In the border region with Pakistan , the mujahideen would often launch 800 rockets per day .
Between April 1985 and January 1987 , they carried out over 23,500 shelling attacks on government targets .
The mujahideen surveyed firing positions that they normally located near villages within the range of Soviet artillery posts , putting the villagers in danger of death from Soviet retaliation .
The mujahideen used land mines heavily .
Often , they would enlist the services of the local inhabitants , even children .
They concentrated on both civilian and military targets , knocking out bridges , closing major roads , attacking convoys , disrupting the electric power system and industrial production , and attacking police stations and Soviet military installations and air bases .
They assassinated government officials and PDPA members , and laid siege to small rural outposts .
In March 1982 , a bomb exploded at the Ministry of Education , damaging several buildings .
In the same month , a widespread power failure darkened Kabul when a pylon on the transmission line from the Naghlu power station was blown up .
In June 1982 a column of about 1,000 young communist party members sent out to work in the Panjshir valley were ambushed within 30 km of Kabul , with heavy loss of life .
On September 4 , 1985 , insurgents shot down a domestic Bakhtar Airlines plane as it took off from Kandahar airport , killing all 52 people aboard .
Mujahideen groups used for assassination had three to five men in each .
After they received their mission to kill certain government officials , they busied themselves with studying his pattern of life and its details and then selecting the method of fulfilling their established mission .
They practiced shooting at automobiles , shooting out of automobiles , laying mines in government accommodation or houses , using poison , and rigging explosive charges in transport .
In May 1985 , the seven principal rebel organizations formed the Seven Party Mujahideen Alliance to coordinate their military operations against the Soviet army .
Late in 1985 , the groups were active in and around Kabul , unleashing rocket attacks and conducting operations against the communist government .
By mid 1987 the Soviet Union announced it would start withdrawing its forces .
Sibghatullah Mojaddedi was selected as the head of the Interim Islamic State of Afghanistan , in an attempt to reassert its legitimacy against the Moscow sponsored Kabul regime .
Mojaddedi , as head of the Interim Afghan Government , met with then Vice President of the United States George H. W. Bush , achieving a critical diplomatic victory for the Afghan resistance .
Defeat of the Kabul government was their solution for peace .
This confidence , sharpened by their distrust of the United Nations , virtually guaranteed their refusal to accept a political compromise .
Foreign involvement and aid to the mujahideen The Afghans were supported by a number of other countries , with the US and Saudi Arabia offering the greatest financial support .
However , the Afghans were also aided by others : the UK , Egypt , China , Iran , and Pakistan .
Ground support , for political reasons , was limited to regional countries .
The United States began training insurgents in , and directing propaganda broadcasts into Afghanistan from Pakistan in 1978 .
Then , in early 1979 , U.S. foreign service officers began meeting insurgent leaders to determine their needs .
According to the then US National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski , CIA aid to the insurgents within Afghanistan was approved in July 1979 , six months before the Soviet Invasion .
United States President Jimmy Carter insisted that what he termed `` Soviet aggression '' could not be viewed as an isolated event of limited geographical importance but had to be contested as a potential threat to US influence in the Persian Gulf region .
The US was also worried about the USSR gaining access to the Indian Ocean by coming to an arrangement with Pakistan .
After the Soviet deployment , Pakistan 's military ruler General Muhammad Zia ul Haq started accepting financial aid from the Western powers to aid the mujahideen .
In 1981 , following the election of US President Ronald Reagan , aid for the mujahideen through Zia 's Pakistan significantly increased , mostly due to the efforts of Texas Congressman Charlie Wilson and CIA officer Gust Avrakotos .
US `` Paramilitary Officers '' were instrumental in training , equipping and sometimes leading Mujihadeen forces against the Red Army .
Although the CIA in general and Charlie Wilson , a Texas Congressman , have received most of the attention , the key architect of this strategy was Michael G. Vickers , a young Paramilitary Officer from the CIA 's infamous Special Activities Division .
Michael Pillsbury , a senior Pentagon official overcame bureaucratic resisistance in 1985 1986 and persuaded President Reagan to provide hundreds of Stinger missiles .
The United States , the United Kingdom , and Saudi Arabia became major financial contributors , the United States donating `` $ 600 million in aid per year , with a matching amount coming from the Persian Gulf states . ''
The People 's Republic of China also sold Type 59 tanks , Type 68 assault rifles , Type 56 assault rifles , Type 69 RPGs , and much more to mujahideen in co operation with the CIA , as did Egypt with assault rifles .
Of particular significance was the donation of US made FIM 92 Stinger anti aircraft missile systems , which caused a small increase in aircraft losses of the Soviet Air Force .
The main impact that it made , however , was the change it led to in Soviet tactics helicopters increasing stayed over friendly forces and limited daytime flights , jetcraft were forced to fly much higher , and other contingency measures were put in place .
In March 1985 , the US government adopted National Security Decision Directive -LRB- NSDD -RRB- 166 , which set a goal of military victory for the mujahideen .
After 1985 the CIA and Inter Services Intelligence -LRB- ISI -RRB- placed greater pressure on the mujahideen to attack government strongholds .
Under direct instructions from Director of Central Intelligence William Casey , the CIA initiated programs for training Afghans in techniques such as car bombs and assassinations and in engaging in cross border raids into the USSR .
Pakistan 's ISI and Special Service Group -LRB- SSG -RRB- were actively involved in the conflict , and in cooperation with the CIA and the United States Army Special Forces , as well as the British Special Air Service , supported the mujahideen .
The theft of large sums of aid spurred Pakistan 's economic growth , but along with the war in general had devastating side effects for that country .
The siphoning off of aid weapons in the port city of Karachi contributed to disorder and violence there , while heroin entering from Afghanistan to pay for arms contributed to addiction problems .
In retaliation for Pakistan 's assistance to the insurgents , the KHAD Afghan security service , under leader Mohammad Najibullah , carried out -LRB- according to the Mitrokhin archives and other sources -RRB- a large number of operations against Pakistan .
In 1987 , 127 incidents resulted in 234 deaths in Pakistan .
In April 1988 , an ammunition depot outside the Pakistani capital of Islamabad was blown up killing 100 and injuring more than 1000 people .
The KHAD and KGB were suspected in the perpetration of these acts .
Pakistan took in millions of Afghan refugees -LRB- mostly Pashtun -RRB- fleeing the Soviet occupation .
Although the refugees were controlled within Pakistan 's largest province , Balochistan under then martial law ruler General Rahimuddin Khan , the influx of so many refugees believed to be the largest refugee population in the world spread into several other regions .
All of this had a heavy impact on Pakistan and its effects continue to this day .
Pakistan , through its support for the mujahideen , played a significant role in the eventual withdrawal of Soviet military personnel from Afghanistan .
Pakistan went to the point of maintaining a limited air war against Afghan Soviet forces .
April 1985 January 1987 : Exit strategy The first step of the exit strategy was to transfer the burden of fighting the mujahideen to the Afghan armed forces , with the aim of preparing them to operate without Soviet help .
During this phase , the Soviet contingent was restricted to supporting the DRA forces by providing artillery , air support and technical assistance , though some large scale operations were still carried out by Soviet troops .
Under Soviet guidance , the DRA armed forces were built up to an official strength of 302,000 in 1986 .
To minimize the risk of a coup d'état , they were divided into different branches , each modeled on its Soviet counterpart .
The ministry of defense forces numbered 132,000 , the ministry of interior 70,000 and the ministry of state security -LRB- KHAD -RRB- 80,000 .
However , these were theoretical figures : in reality each service was plagued with desertions , the army alone suffering 32,000 per year .
The decision to engage primarily Afghan forces was taken by the Soviets , but was resented by the PDPA , who viewed the departure of their protectors without enthusiasm .
In May 1987 a DRA force attacked well entrenched mujahideen positions in the Arghandab District , but the mujahideen held their ground , and the attackers suffered heavy casualties .
In the spring of 1986 , an offensive into Paktia Province briefly occupied the mujahideen base at Zhawar only at the cost of heavy losses .
Meanwhile , the mujahideen benefited from expanded foreign military support from the United States , Saudi Arabia , Pakistan and other Muslim nations .
The US tended to favor the Afghan resistance forces led by Ahmed Shah Massoud , and US support for Massoud 's forces increased considerably during the Reagan administration in what US military and intelligence forces called `` Operation Cyclone . ''
Primary advocates for supporting Massoud included two Heritage Foundation foreign policy analysts , Michael Johns and James A. Phillips , both of whom championed Massoud as the Afghan resistance leader most worthy of US support under the Reagan Doctrine .
January 1987 February 1989 : Withdrawal In the last phase , Soviet troops prepared and executed their withdrawal from Afghanistan .
They hardly engaged in offensive operations at all , and were content to defend against mujahideen raids .
The one exception was Operation Magistral , a successful sweep that cleared the road between Gardez and Khost .
This operation did not have any lasting effect , but it allowed the Soviets to symbolically end their presence with a victory .
The first half of the Soviet contingent was withdrawn from May 15 to August 16 , 1988 and the second from November 15 to February 15 , 1989 .
The withdrawal was generally executed peacefully , as the Soviets had negotiated ceasefires with local mujahideen commanders , in order to ensure a safe passage .
Now fighting alone , the DRA forces were obliged to abandon some provincial capitals , and it was widely believed that they would not be able to resist the mujahideen for long .
However , in the spring of 1989 DRA forces inflicted a sharp defeat on the mujahideen at Jalalabad , and as a result , the war remained stalemated .
The government of President Karmal , a puppet regime , was largely ineffective .
It was weakened by divisions within the PDPA and the Parcham faction , and the regime 's efforts to expand its base of support proved futile .
Moscow came to regard Karmal as a failure and blamed him for the problems .
Years later , when Karmal 's inability to consolidate his government had become obvious , Mikhail Gorbachev , then General Secretary of the Soviet Communist Party , said : `` The main reason that there has been no national consolidation so far is that Comrade Karmal is hoping to continue sitting in Kabul with our help . ''
In November 1986 , Mohammad Najibullah , former chief of the Afghan secret police -LRB- KHAD -RRB- , was elected president and a new constitution was adopted .
He also introduced in 1987 a policy of `` national reconciliation , '' devised by experts of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union , and later used in other regions of the world .
Despite high expectations , the new policy neither made the Moscow backed Kabul regime more popular , nor did it convince the insurgents to negotiate with the ruling government .
Informal negotiations for a Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan had been underway since 1982 .
In 1988 , the governments of Pakistan and Afghanistan , with the United States and Soviet Union serving as guarantors , signed an agreement settling the major differences between them known as the Geneva Accords .
The United Nations set up a special Mission to oversee the process .
In this way , Najibullah had stabilized his political position enough to begin matching Moscow 's moves toward withdrawal .
On July 20 , 1987 , the withdrawal of Soviet troops from the country was announced .
The withdrawal of Soviet forces was planned out by Lt. Gen. Boris Gromov , who , at the time , was the commander of the 40th Army .
Among other things the Geneva accords identified the US and Soviet non intervention in the internal affairs of Pakistan and Afghanistan and a timetable for full Soviet withdrawal .
The agreement on withdrawal held , and on February 15 , 1989 , the last Soviet troops departed on schedule from Afghanistan .
Declaration of War Japan issued a declaration of war on 8 February 1904 .
However , three hours before Japan 's declaration of war was received by the Russian Government , the Imperial Japanese Navy attacked the Russian Far East Fleet at Port Arthur .
Tsar Nicholas II was stunned by news of the attack .
He could not believe that Japan would commit an act of war without a formal declaration , and had been assured by his ministers that the Japanese would not fight .
Russia declared war on Japan eight days later .
However , the requirement to declare war before commencing hostilities was not made international law until after the war had ended in October 1907 , effective from 26 January 1910 .
Montenegro also declared war against Japan as a gesture of moral support for Russia out of gratitude for Russian support in Montenegro 's struggles against the Ottoman Empire .
However , due to logistical reasons and distance , Montenegro 's contribution to the war effort was limited to those Montenegrins who served in the Russian armed forces .
Campaign of 1904 Port Arthur , on the Liaodong Peninsula in the south of Manchuria , had been fortified into a major naval base by the Imperial Russian Army .
Since it needed to control the sea in order to fight a war on the Asian mainland , Japan 's first military objective was to neutralize the Russian fleet at Port Arthur .
Battle of Port Arthur On the night of 8 February 1904 , the Japanese fleet under Admiral Heihachiro Togo opened the war with a surprise torpedo boat attack on the Russian ships at Port Arthur .
The attack badly damaged the Tsesarevich and Retvizan , the heaviest battleships in Russia 's far Eastern theater , and the 6,600 ton cruiser Pallada .
These attacks developed into the Battle of Port Arthur the next morning .
A series of indecisive naval engagements followed , in which Admiral Togo was unable to attack the Russian fleet successfully as it was protected by the shore batteries of the harbor , and the Russians were reluctant to leave the harbor for the open seas , especially after the death of Admiral Stepan Osipovich Makarov on 13 April 1904 .
However , these engagements provided cover for a Japanese landing near Incheon in Korea .
From Incheon the Japanese occupied Seoul and then the rest of Korea .
By the end of April , the Imperial Japanese Army under Kuroki Itei was ready to cross the Yalu river into Russian occupied Manchuria .
Battle of Yalu River In contrast to the Japanese strategy of rapidly gaining ground to control Manchuria , Russian strategy focused on fighting delaying actions to gain time for reinforcements to arrive via the long Trans Siberian railway which was at the time incomplete near Irkutsk .
On 1 May 1904 , the Battle of Yalu River became the first major land battle of the war , when Japanese troops stormed a Russian position after an unopposed river crossing .
Japanese troops proceeded to land at several points on the Manchurian coast , and , in a series of engagements , drove the Russians back towards Port Arthur .
These battles , including the Battle of Nanshan on 25 May 1904 , were marked by heavy Japanese losses from attacking entrenched Russian positions , but the Russians maintained their focus on defending , and did not counterattack .
Blockade of Port Arthur The Japanese attempted to deny the Russians use of Port Arthur .
During the night of 13 February 14 February , the Japanese attempted to block the entrance to Port Arthur by sinking several cement filled steamers in the deep water channel to the port , but they sank too deep to be effective .
Another similar attempt to block the harbor entrance during the night of 3 4 May also failed .
In March , the charismatic Vice Admiral Makarov had taken command of the First Russian Pacific Squadron with the intention of breaking out of the Port Arthur blockade .
On 12 April 1904 , two Russian pre dreadnought battleships , the flagship Petropavlovsk and the Pobeida slipped out of port but struck Japanese mines off Port Arthur .
The Petropavlovsk sank almost immediately , while the Pobeida had to be towed back to port for extensive repairs .
Admiral Makarov , the single most effective Russian naval strategist of the war , had perished on the battleship Petropavlovsk .
On 15 April 1904 , the Russian government made overtures threatening to seize the British war correspondents who were taking the ship Haimun into warzones to report for the London based Times newspaper , citing concerns about the possibility of the British giving away Russian positions to the Japanese fleet .
The Russians learned quickly , and soon employed the Japanese tactic of offensive minelaying .
On 15 May 1904 , two Japanese battleships , the Yashima and the Hatsuse , were lured into a recently laid Russian minefield off Port Arthur , each striking at least two mines .
The Hatsuse sank within minutes , taking 450 sailors with her , while the Yashima sank while under tow towards Korea for repairs .
On 23 June 1904 , a breakout attempt by the Russian squadron , now under the command of Admiral Wilgelm Vitgeft failed .
By the end of the month , Japanese artillery were firing shells into the harbor .
Battle of the Yellow Sea Japan began a long siege of Port Arthur .
On 10 August 1904 , the Russian fleet again attempted to break out and proceed to Vladivostok , but upon reaching the open sea were confronted by Admiral Togo 's battleship squadron .
Known to the Russians as the Battle of August 10 , but more commonly referred to as the Battle of the Yellow Sea , battleships from both sides exchanged gunfire .
The battle had the elements of a decisive battle , though Admiral Togo knew that another Russian battleship fleet would soon be sent to the Pacific .
The Japanese had only one battleship fleet and Togo had already lost two battleships to Russian mines .
The Russian and Japanese battleships continued to exchange gunfire , until the Russian flagship , the battleship Tsesarevich , received a direct hit on the bridge , killing the fleet commander , Admiral Vitgeft .
At this , the Russian fleet turned around and headed back into Port Arthur .
Though no warships were sunk by either side in the battle , the Russians were now back in port and the Japanese navy still had battleships to meet the new Russian fleet when it arrived .
Siege and Fall of Port Arthur As the siege of Port Arthur continued , Japanese troops tried numerous frontal assaults on the fortified hilltops overlooking the harbor , which were defeated with Japanese casualties in the thousands .
Eventually , though , with the aid of several batteries of 11 inch -LRB- 280 mm -RRB- Krupp howitzers , the Japanese were finally able to capture the key hilltop bastion in December 1904 .
From this vantage point , the long range artillery was able to shell the Russian fleet , which was unable to retaliate effectively against the land based artillery and was unable or unwilling to sortie out against the blockading fleet .
Four Russian battleships and two cruisers were sunk in succession , with the fifth and last battleship being forced to scuttle a few weeks later .
This constituted the sinking of all capital ships of the Russian fleet in the Pacific , and was likely the only example in military history when such a scale of devastation was achieved by land based artillery against major warships .
Meanwhile , on land , attempts to relieve the besieged city by land also failed , and , after the Battle of Liaoyang in late August , the northern Russian force that may have been able to relieve Port Arthur retreated to Mukden -LRB- Shenyang -RRB- .
Major General Anatoly Stessel , commander of the Port Arthur garrison , believed that the purpose of defending the city was lost after the fleet was destroyed .
Several large underground mines were exploded in late December , resulting in the costly capture of a few more pieces of the defensive line .
Still , the Russian defenders were effecting a disproportionate scale of casualties each time the Japanese attacked , and the garrison was still well stocked with months of food and ammunition .
Despite this , Stessel decided to surrender to the surprised Japanese generals on 2 January 1905 .
He made this decision without the consultation of the other military staff present or of the Tsar and military command , who all disagreed with the choice .
Stessel was convicted by a court martial in 1908 and sentenced to death for his incompetent defense and disobeying orders , though he was later pardoned .
Baltic Fleet Meanwhile , at sea , the Russians were preparing to reinforce the Far East Fleet by sending the Baltic Fleet , under Admiral Zinovy Rozhestvensky The fleet sailed around the world from the Baltic Sea to China via the Cape of Good Hope .
The Baltic Fleet would not reach the Far East until May 1905 .
On 21 October 1904 , while steaming past Great Britain -LRB- an ally of Japan but neutral in this war -RRB- , vessels of the Russian Fleet nearly provoked war with England in the Dogger Bank incident by firing on British fishing boats that they mistook for enemy torpedo boats .
Campaign of 1905 Harsh winter and final battles With the fall of Port Arthur , the Japanese 3rd army was now able to continue northward and reinforce positions south of Russian held Mukden .
With the onset of the severe Manchurian winter , there had been no major land engagements since the Battle of Shaho the previous year .
Both sides camped opposite each other along 60 to 70 miles -LRB- 110 km -RRB- of front lines , south of Mukden .
The Russian Second Army under General Oskar Grippenberg , between January 25 29 , attacked the Japanese left flank near the town of Sandepu , almost breaking through .
This caught the Japanese by surprise .
However , without support from other Russian units the attack stalled , Grippenberg was ordered to halt by Kuropatkin and the battle was inconclusive .
The Japanese knew that they needed to destroy the Russian army in Manchuria before Russian reinforcements arrived via the Trans Siberian railroad .
The Battle of Mukden commenced on 20 February 1905 .
In the following days Japanese forces proceeded to assault the right and left flanks of Russian forces surrounding Mukden , along a 50 mile -LRB- 80 km -RRB- front .
Both sides were well entrenched and were backed with hundreds of artillery pieces .
After days of harsh fighting , added pressure from both flanks forced both ends of the Russian defensive line to curve backwards .
Seeing they were about to be encircled , the Russians began a general retreat , fighting a series of fierce rearguard actions , which soon deteriorated in the confusion and collapse of Russian forces .
On 10 March 1905 after three weeks of fighting , General Kuropatkin decided to withdraw to the north of Mukden .
The retreating Russian Manchurian Army formations disintegrated as fighting units , but the Japanese failed to destroy them completely .
The Japanese themselves had suffered large casualties and were in no condition to pursue .
Although the battle of Mukden was a major defeat for the Russians it had not been decisive , and the final victory would depend on the navy .
Victory at Tsushima The Russian Second Pacific Squadron -LRB- the renamed Baltic Fleet -RRB- sailed 18,000 miles -LRB- 29,000 km -RRB- to relieve Port Arthur .
The demoralizing news that Port Arthur had fallen reached the fleet while at Madagascar .
Admiral Rozhestvensky 's only hope now was to reach the port of Vladivostok .
There were three routes to Vladivostok , with the shortest and most direct passing through Tsushima Straits between Korea and Japan .
However , this was also the most dangerous route as it passed very close to the Japanese home islands .
Admiral Togo was aware of the Russian progress and understood that with the fall of Port Arthur , the Second and Third Pacific Squadrons would try to reach the only other Russian port in the Far East , Vladivostok .
Battle plans were laid down and ships were repaired and refitted to intercept the Russian fleet .
The Japanese Combined Fleet , which had originally consisted of six battleships , was now down to four -LRB- two had been lost to mines -RRB- , but still retained its cruisers , destroyers , and torpedo boats .
The Russian Second Pacific Squadron contained eight battleships , including four new battleships of the Borodino class , as well as cruisers , destroyers and other auxiliaries for a total of 38 ships .
By the end of May the Second Pacific Squadron was on the last leg of its journey to Vladivostok .
They decided to take the shorter , riskier route between Korea and Japan .
They traveled at night so they might not be discovered .
Unfortunately for the Russians , one of their hospital ships exposed a light , which was sighted by the Japanese armed merchant cruiser Shinano Maru .
Wireless communication was used to inform Togo 's headquarters , where the Combined Fleet was immediately ordered to sortie .
Still receiving naval intelligence from scouting forces , the Japanese were able to position their fleet so that they would `` cross the T '' of the Russian fleet .
The Japanese engaged the Russian fleet in the Tsushima Straits on 27 May 28 May 1905 .
The Russian fleet was virtually annihilated , losing eight battleships , numerous smaller vessels , and more than 5,000 men , while the Japanese lost three torpedo boats and 116 men .
Only three Russian vessels escaped to Vladivostok .
After the Battle of Tsushima , the Japanese army occupied the entire Sakhalin Islands chain to force the Russians to sue for peace .
Military attaches and observers Military and civilian observers from every major power closely followed the course of the war .
Most were able to report on events from a perspective somewhat like what is now termed `` embedded '' positions within the land and naval forces of both Russia and Japan .
These military attachés and other observers prepared voluminous first hand accounts of the war and analytical papers .
In depth observer narratives of the war and more narrowly focused professional journal articles were written soon after the war ; and these post war reports conclusively illustrated the battlefield destructiveness of this conflict .
This was the first time the tactics of entrenched positions for infantry defended with machine guns and artillery became vitally important , and both were dominant factors in World War I. Though entrenched positions were a significant part of both the Franco Prussian War and the American Civil War due to the advent of breech loading rifles , the lessons learned regarding high casualty counts were learned in part after World War I. From a 21st century perspective , it is now apparent that tactical lessons which were available to the observer nations were disregarded or not used in the preparations for war in Europe and during the course of World War I. In 1904 1905 , Ian Standish Monteith Hamilton was the military attache of the British Indian Army serving with the Japanese army in Manchuria .
Amongst the several military attachés from Western countries , he was the first to arrive in Japan after the start of the war .
As the earliest , he would be recognized as the dean of multi national attachés and observers in this conflict ; but he was out ranked by a soldier who would become a better known figure , British Field Marshal William Gustavus Nicholson , 1st Baron Nicholson , later to become Chief of the Imperial General Staff .
1919 First Polish Soviet conflicts The first serious armed conflict of the war took place around February 14 February 16 , near the towns of Maniewicze and Biaroza in Belarus .
By late February the Soviet westward advance had come to a halt .
Both Polish and Soviet forces had also been engaging the Ukrainian forces , and active fighting was going on in the territories of the Baltic countries -LRB- cf. Estonian War of Independence , Latvian War of Independence , Lithuanian Wars of Independence -RRB- .
In early March 1919 , Polish units started an offensive , crossing the Neman River , taking Pinsk , and reaching the outskirts of Lida .
Both the Soviet and Polish advances began around the same time in April -LRB- Polish forces started a major offensive on April 16 -RRB- , resulting in increasing numbers of troops arriving in the area .
That month the Red Army had captured Grodno , but was soon pushed out by a Polish counter offensive .
Unable to accomplish its objectives and facing strengthening offensives from the White forces , the Red Army withdrew from its positions and reorganized .
Soon the Polish Soviet War would begin in earnest .
Polish forces continued a steady eastern advance .
They took Lida on April 17 and Nowogródek on April 18 , and recaptured Vilnius on April 19 , driving the Litbel government from their proclaimed capital .
On August 8 , Polish forces took Minsk and on the 28th of that month they deployed tanks for the first time .
After heavy fighting , the town of Babruysk near the Berezina River was captured .
By October 2 , Polish forces reached the Daugava river and secured the region from Desna to Daugavpils -LRB- Dyneburg -RRB- .
Polish success continued until early 1920 .
Sporadic battles erupted between Polish forces and the Red Army , but the latter was preoccupied with the White counter revolutionary forces and was steadily retreating on the entire western frontline , from Latvia in the north to Ukraine in the south .
In early summer 1919 , the White movement had gained the initiative , and its forces under the command of Anton Denikin were marching on Moscow .
Piłsudski was aware that the Soviets were not friends of independent Poland , and considered war with Soviet Russia inevitable .
He viewed their westward advance as a major issue , but also thought that he could get a better deal for Poland from the Bolsheviks than their Russian civil war contenders , as the White Russians representatives of the old Russian Empire , partitioner of Poland were willing to accept only limited independence of Poland , likely in the borders similar to that of Congress Poland , and clearly objected to Ukrainian independence , crucial for Piłsudski 's Międzymorze , while the Bolsheviks did proclaim the partitions null and void .
Piłsudski thus speculated that Poland would be better off with the Bolsheviks , alienated from the Western powers , than with the restored Russian Empire .
By his refusal to join the attack on Lenin 's struggling government , ignoring the strong pressure from the Entente , Piłsudski had likely saved the Bolshevik government in summer fall 1919 .
He later wrote that in case of a White victory , in the east Poland could only gain the `` ethnic border '' at best -LRB- the Curzon line -RRB- .
At the same time , Lenin offered Poles the territories of Minsk , Zhytomyr , Khmelnytskyi , in what was described as mini `` Brest '' ; Polish military leader Kazimierz Sosnkowski wrote that the territorial proposals of the Bolsheviks were much better than what the Poles had wanted to achieve .
Diplomatic front , part 1 : the alliances In 1919 , several unsuccessful attempts at peace negotiations were made by various Polish and Russian factions .
In the meantime , Polish Lithuanian relations worsened as Polish politicians found it hard to accept the Lithuanians ' demands for independence and territories , especially on ceding the city of Vilnius , Lithuania 's historical capital which had a Polish ethnic majority .
Polish negotiators made better progress with the Latvian Provisional Government , and in late 1919 and early 1920 Polish and Latvian forces were conducting joint operations including the Battle of Daugavpils , against Soviet Russia .
The Warsaw Treaty , an agreement with the exiled Ukrainian nationalist leader Symon Petlura signed on April 21 , 1920 , was the main Polish diplomatic success .
Petlura , who formally represented the government of the Ukrainian People 's Republic -LRB- by then de facto defeated by Bolsheviks -RRB- , along with some Ukrainian forces , fled to Poland , where he found asylum .
His control extended only to a sliver of land near the Polish border .
In such conditions , there was little difficulty convincing Petlura to join an alliance with Poland , despite recent conflict between the two nations that had been settled in favor of Poland .
By concluding an agreement with Piłsudski , Petlura accepted the Polish territorial gains in Western Ukraine and the future Polish Ukrainian border along the Zbruch River .
In exchange , he was promised independence for Ukraine and Polish military assistance in reinstalling his government in Kiev .
For Piłsudski , this alliance gave his campaign for the Międzymorze federation the legitimacy of joint international effort , secured part of the Polish eastward border , and laid a foundation for a Polish dominated Ukrainian state between Russia and Poland .
For Petlura , this was the final chance to preserve the statehood and , at least , the theoretical independence of the Ukrainian heartlands , even while accepting the loss of western Ukrainian lands to Poland .
Yet both of them were opposed at home .
Piłsudski faced stiff opposition from Dmowski 's National Democrats who opposed Ukrainian independence .
Petlura , in turn , was criticized by many Ukrainian politicians for entering a pact with the Poles and giving up on Western Ukraine .
The alliance with Petliura did result in 15,000 pro Polish allied Ukrainian troops at the beginning of the campaign , increasing to 35,000 through recruitment and desertion from the Soviet side during the war .
But in the end , this would prove too few to support Petlura 's hopes for independent Ukraine , or Piłsudski 's dreams of a Ukrainian ally in the Międzymorze federation .
1920 The tide turns : Operation Kiev Until April , the Polish forces had been slowly but steadily advancing eastward .
The new Latvian government requested and obtained Polish help in capturing Daugavpils .
The city fell after heavy fighting at the Battle of Daugavpils in January and was handed over to the Latvians .
By March , Polish forces had driven a wedge between Soviet forces to the north -LRB- Belorussia -RRB- and south -LRB- Ukraine -RRB- .
On April 24 , Poland began its main offensive , Operation Kiev .
Its stated goal was the creation of an independent Ukraine that would become part of Piłsudski 's project of a `` Międzymorze '' Federation .
Poland 's forces were assisted by 15,000 Ukrainian soldiers under Symon Petlura , representing the Ukrainian People 's Republic .
On April 26 , in his `` Call to the People of Ukraine '' , Piłsudski told his audience that `` the Polish army would only stay as long as necessary until a legal Ukrainian government took control over its own territory '' .
Despite this , many Ukrainians were just as anti Polish as anti Bolshevik , and resented the Polish advance .
The Polish 3rd Army easily won border clashes with the Red Army in Ukraine but the Reds withdrew with minimal losses .
The combined Polish Ukrainian forces entered an abandoned Kiev on May 7 , encountering only token resistance .
The Polish military thrust was met with Red Army counterattacks on 29 May .
Polish forces in the area , preparing for an offensive towards Zhlobin , managed to hold their ground , but were unable to start their own planned offensive .
In the north , Polish forces had fared much worse .
The Polish 1st Army was defeated and forced to retreat , pursued by the Russian 15th Army which recaptured territories between the Western Dvina and Berezina rivers .
Polish forces attempted to take advantage of the exposed flanks of the attackers but the enveloping forces failed to stop the Soviet advance .
At the end of May , the front had stabilised near the small river Auta , and Soviet forces began preparing for the next push .
On May 24 1920 , the Polish forces in the south were engaged for the first time by Semyon Budyonny 's famous 1st Cavalry Army -LRB- Konarmia -RRB- .
Repeated attacks by Budyonny 's Cossack cavalry broke the Polish Ukrainian front on June 5 .
The Soviets then deployed mobile cavalry units to disrupt the Polish rearguard , targeting communications and logistics .
By June 10 , Polish armies were in retreat along the entire front .
On June 13 , the Polish army , along with the Petlura 's Ukrainian troops , abandoned Kiev to the Red Army .
String of Soviet victories The Russian counter offensive was boosted by Aleksei Brusilov 's engagement ; 14,000 officers and over 100,000 deserters enlisted in or returned to the Red Army , and thousands of civilian volunteers contributed to the effort .
The commander of the Polish 3rd Army in Ukraine , General Edward Rydz Śmigły , decided to break through the Soviet line toward the northwest .
Polish forces in Ukraine managed to withdraw relatively unscathed , but were unable to support the northern front and reinforce the defenses at the Auta River for the decisive battle that was soon to take place there .
Due to insufficient forces , Poland 's 200 mile long front was manned by a thin line of 120,000 troops backed by some 460 artillery pieces with no strategic reserves .
This approach to holding ground harked back to the World War I practice of `` establishing a fortified line of defense '' .
It had shown some merit on the Western Front saturated with troops , machine guns , and artillery .
Poland 's eastern front , however , was weakly manned , supported with inadequate artillery , and had almost no fortifications .
Against the Polish line the Red Army gathered its Northwest Front led by the young General Mikhail Tukhachevsky .
Their numbers exceeded 108,000 infantry and 11,000 cavalry , supported by 722 artillery pieces and 2,913 machine guns .
The Soviets at some crucial places outnumbered the Poles four to one .
Tukhachevsky launched his offensive on July 4 , along the Smolensk Brest Litovsk axis , crossing the Auta and Berezina rivers .
The northern 3rd Cavalry Corps , led by Gayk Bzhishkyan -LRB- Gay Dmitrievich Gay , Gaj Chan -RRB- , were to envelop Polish forces from the north , moving near the Lithuanian and Prussian border -LRB- both of these belonging to nations hostile to Poland -RRB- .
The 4th , 15th , and 3rd Armies were to push west , supported from the south by the 16th Army and Grupa Mozyrska .
For three days the outcome of the battle hung in the balance , but the Soviet ' numerical superiority proved decisive and by July 7 Polish forces were in full retreat along the entire front .
However , due to the stubborn defense by Polish units , Tukhachevsky 's plan to break through the front and push the defenders southwest into the Pinsk Marshes failed .
Polish resistance was offered again on a line of `` German trenches '' , a heavily fortified line of World War I field fortifications that presented an opportunity to stem the Red Army offensive .
However , the Polish troops were insufficient in number .
Soviet forces found a weakly defended part of the front and broke through .
Gej Chan and Lithuanian forces captured Vilnius on 14 July , forcing the Poles into retreat again .
In Galicia to the south , General Semyon Budyonny 's cavalry advanced far into the Polish rear , capturing Brodno and approaching Lwów and Zamość .
In early July , it became clear to the Poles that the Soviets ' objectives were not limited to pushing their borders westwards .
Poland 's very independence was at stake .
Soviet forces moved forward at the remarkable rate of 20 miles -LRB- 32 km -RRB- a day .
Grodno in Belarus fell on 19 July ; Brest Litovsk fell on 1 August .
The Polish attempted to defend the Bug River line with 4th Army and Grupa Poleska units , but were able to delay the Red Army advance for only one week .
After crossing the Narew River on 2 August , the Soviet Northwest Front was only 60 miles -LRB- 97 km -RRB- from Warsaw .
The Brest Litovsk fortress which was to be the headquarters of the planned Polish counteroffensive fell to the 16th Army in the first attack .
The Soviet Southwest Front pushed the Polish forces out of Ukraine .
Stalin had then disobeyed his orders and ordered his forces to close on Zamość , as well as Lwów the largest city in southeastern Poland and an important industrial center , garrisoned by the Polish 6th Army .
The city was soon besieged .
This created a hole in the lines of the Red Army , but at the same time opened the way to the Polish capital .
Five Soviet armies approached Warsaw .
Polish politicians tried to secure peace with Moscow on any conditions but the Bolsheviks refused .
Polish forces in Galicia near Lwów launched a successful counteroffensive to slow down the Red Army advance .
This stopped the retreat of Polish forces on the southern front .
However , the worsening situation near the Polish capital of Warsaw prevented the Poles from continuing that southern counteroffensive and pushing east .
Forces were mustered to take part in the coming battle for Warsaw .
Diplomatic Front , Part 2 With the tide turning against Poland , Piłsudski 's political power weakened , while his opponents ' , including Roman Dmowski 's , rose .
Piłsudski did manage to regain his influence , especially over the military , almost at the last moment as the Soviet forces were approaching Warsaw .
The Polish political scene had begun to unravel in panic , with the government of Leopold Skulski resigning in early June .
Meanwhile , the Soviet leadership 's confidence soared .
In a telegram , Lenin exclaimed : `` We must direct all our attention to preparing and strengthening the Western Front .
A new slogan must be announced : ` Prepare for war against Poland ' . ''
Soviet communist theorist Nikolay Bukharin , writer for the newspaper Pravda , wished for the resources to carry the campaign beyond Warsaw `` right up to London and Paris '' .
General Tukhachevsky 's order of the day , 2 July , 1920 read : `` To the West !
Over the corpse of White Poland lies the road to worldwide conflagration .
March on Vilno , Minsk , Warsaw ! ''
and `` onward to Berlin over the corpse of Poland ! ''
The increasing hope of certain victory , however , gave rise to political intrigues between Soviet commanders .
By order of the Soviet Communist Party , a Polish puppet government , the Provisional Polish Revolutionary Committee -LRB- Polish : Tymczasowy Komitet Rewolucyjny Polski , TKRP -RRB- , had been formed on 28 July in Białystok to organise administration of the Polish territories captured by the Red Army .
The TKRP had very little support from the ethnic Polish population and recruited its supporters mostly from the ranks of minorities , primarily Jews .
At the height of the Polish Soviet conflict , Jews had been subject to anti semitic violence by Polish forces , who considered Jews to be a potential threat , and who often accused Jews as being the masterminds of Russian Bolshevism ; during the Battle of Warsaw , the Polish government interned all Jewish volunteers and sent Jewish volunteer officers to an internment camp .
Britain 's Prime Minister , David Lloyd George , who wanted to negotiate a favourable trade agreement with the Bolsheviks pressed Poland to make peace on Soviet terms and refused any assistance to Poland which would alienate the Whites in the Russian Civil War .
In July 1920 , Britain announced it would send huge quantities of World War I surplus military supplies to Poland , but a threatened general strike by the Trades Union Congress , who objected to British support of `` White Poland '' , ensured that none of the weapons destined for Poland left British ports .
David Lloyd George had never been enthusiastic about supporting the Poles , and had been pressured by his more right wing Cabinet members such as Lord Curzon and Winston Churchill into offering the supplies .
On the 11 July , 1920 , the government of Great Britain issued a de facto ultimatum to the Soviets .
It demanded the Soviets to stop hostilities against Poland and the Russian Army -LRB- the White Army in Southern Russia lead by Baron Wrangel -RRB- , and to accept what later was called the `` Curzon line '' as a temporary border with Poland , until a permanent border could be established in negotiations .
In case of Soviet refusal , the British threatened to assist Poland with all the means available , which , in reality , were limited by the internal political situation in the United Kingdom .
On the 17 July , the Bolsheviks refused and made a counter offer to negotiate a peace treaty directly with Poland .
The British responded by threatening to cut off the on going trade negotiations if the Soviets conducted further offensives against Poland .
These threats were ignored .
The threatened general strike was a convenient excuse for Lloyd George to back out of his commitments .
On August 6 , 1920 , the British Labor Party published a pamphlet stating that British workers would never take part in the war as Poland 's allies , and labor unions blocked supplies to the British expeditionary force assisting Russian Whites in Arkhangelsk .
French Socialists , in their newspaper L'Humanité , declared : `` Not a man , not a sou , not a shell for reactionary and capitalist Poland .
Long live the Russian Revolution !
Long live the Workmen 's International ! ''
Poland also suffered setbacks due to sabotage and delays in deliveries of war supplies , when workers in Czechoslovakia and Germany refused to transit such materials to Poland .
On August 6 the Polish government issued an `` Appeal to the World '' , disputing charges of imperialism , stressing Poland 's determination for self determination and the dangers of Bolshevik `` invasion of Europe '' .
Poland 's neighbor Lithuania had been engaged in serious disputes with Poland over the city of Vilnius and the borderlands surrounding Sejny and Suwalki .
A 1919 Polish attempt to take control over the entire nation by a coup had additionally disrupted their relationship .
The Soviet and Lithuanian governments signed the Soviet Lithuanian Treaty of 1920 on July 12 ; this treaty recognized Vilnius as part of Lithuania .
The treaty contained a secret clause allowing Soviet forces unrestricted movement within Soviet recognized Lithuanian territory during any Soviet war with Poland ; this clause would lead to questions regarding the issue of Lithuanian neutrality in the ongoing Polish Soviet War .
The Lithuanians also provided the Soviets with logistical support .
Despite Lithuanian support , the Soviets did not transfer Vilnius to the Lithuanians till just before the city was to be recaptured by the Polish forces -LRB- in late August -RRB- , instead up till that time the Soviets encouraged their own , pro communist Lithuanian government , Litbel , and were planning a pro communist coup in Lithuania .
The simmering conflict between Poland and Lithuania culminated in the Polish Lithuanian War in August 1920 .
Polish allies were few .
France , continuing its policy of countering Bolshevism now that the Whites in Russia proper had been almost completely defeated , sent a 400 strong advisory group to Poland 's aid in 1919 .
It consisted mostly of French officers , although it also included a few British advisers led by Lieutenant General Sir Adrian Carton De Wiart .
The French officers included a future President of France , Charles de Gaulle ; during the war he won Poland 's highest military decoration , the Virtuti Militari .
In addition to the Allied advisors , France also facilitated the transit to Poland from France of the `` Blue Army '' in 1919 : troops mostly of Polish origin , plus some international volunteers , formerly under French command in World War I. The army was commanded by the Polish general , Józef Haller .
Hungary offered to send a 30,000 cavalry corps to Poland 's aid , but the Czechoslovakian government refused to allow them through as there was a demilitarized zone on the borders after the Czech Hungarian war which ended only a few months before ; some trains with weapon supplies from Hungary did , however , arrive in Poland .
In mid 1920 , the Allied Mission was expanded by some advisers -LRB- becoming the Interallied Mission to Poland -RRB- .
They included : French diplomat , Jean Jules Jusserand ; Maxime Weygand , chief of staff to Marshal Ferdinand Foch , Supreme Commander of the victorious Entente ; and British diplomat , Lord Edgar Vincent D'Abernon .
The newest members of the mission achieved little ; indeed , the crucial Battle of Warsaw was fought and won by the Poles before the mission could return and make its report .
Nonetheless for many years , a myth persisted that it was the timely arrival of Allied forces that had saved Poland , a myth in which Weygand occupied the central role .
Nonetheless Polish French cooperation would continue .
Eventually , on the 21 February , 1921 , France and Poland entered into a formal military alliance , which became an important factor during the subsequent Soviet Polish negotiations .
The tide turns again : The `` Miracle at the Vistula '' On August 10 , 1920 , Soviet Cossack units under the command of Gayk Bzhishkyan crossed the Vistula river , planning to take Warsaw from the west while the main attack came from the east .
On August 13 , an initial Soviet attack was repulsed .
The Polish 1st Army resisted a direct assault on Warsaw as well as stopping the assault at Radzymin .
The Soviet commander in chief , Mikhail Tukhachevsky , felt certain that all was going according to his plan .
However , Polish military intelligence had decrypted the Red Army 's radio messages , and Tukhachevsky was actually falling into a trap set by Piłsudski and his Chief of Staff , Tadeusz Rozwadowski .
The Soviet advance across the Vistula River in the north was moving into an operational vacuum , as there were no sizable Polish forces in the area .
On the other hand , south of Warsaw , where the fate of the war was about to be decided , Tukhachevsky had left only token forces to guard the vital link between the Soviet northwest and southwest fronts .
Another factor that influenced the outcome of the war was the effective neutralization of Budyonny 's 1st Cavalry Army , much feared by Piłsudski and other Polish commanders , in the battles around Lwów .
The Soviet High Command , at Tukhachevsky 's insistence , had ordered the 1st Cavalry Army to march north toward Warsaw and Lublin , but Budyonny disobeyed the order due to a grudge between Tukhachevsky and Yegorov , commander of the southwest front .
Additionally , the political games of Joseph Stalin , chief political commissar of the Southwest Front , decisively influenced the disobedience of Yegorov and Budyonny .
Stalin , seeking a personal triumph , was focused on capturing Lwów far to the southeast of Warsaw which was besieged by Bolshevik forces but still resisted their assaults .
The Polish 5th Army under General Władysław Sikorski counterattacked on August 14 from the area of the Modlin fortress , crossing the Wkra River .
It faced the combined forces of the numerically and materially superior Soviet 3rd and 15th Armies .
In one day the Soviet advance toward Warsaw and Modlin had been halted and soon turned into retreat .
Sikorski 's 5th Army pushed the exhausted Soviet formations away from Warsaw in a lightning operation .
Polish forces advanced at a speed of thirty kilometers a day , soon destroying any Soviet hopes for completing their enveloping maneuver in the north .
By August 16 , the Polish counteroffensive had been fully joined by Marshal Piłsudski 's `` Reserve Army . ''
Precisely executing his plan , the Polish force , advancing from the south , found a huge gap between the Soviet fronts and exploited the weakness of the Soviet `` Mozyr Group '' that was supposed to protect the weak link between the Soviet fronts .
The Poles continued their northward offensive with two armies following and destroying the surprised enemy .
They reached the rear of Tukhachevsky 's forces , the majority of which were encircled by August 18 .
Only that same day did Tukhachevsky , at his Minsk headquarters 300 miles -LRB- 480 km -RRB- east of Warsaw , become fully aware of the proportions of the Soviet defeat and ordered the remnants of his forces to retreat and regroup .
He hoped to straighten his front line , halt the Polish attack , and regain the initiative , but the orders either arrived too late or failed to arrive at all .
The Soviet armies in the center of the front fell into chaos .
Tukhachevsky ordered a general retreat toward the Bug River , but by then he had lost contact with most of his forces near Warsaw , and all the Bolshevik plans had been thrown into disarray by communication failures .
The Bolshevik armies retreated in a disorganised fashion ; entire divisions panicking and disintegrating .
The Red Army 's defeat was so great and unexpected that , at the instigation of Piłsudski 's detractors , the Battle of Warsaw is often referred to in Poland as the `` Miracle at the Vistula '' .
Previously unknown documents from Polish Central Military Archive found in 2004 proved that the successful breaking of Red Army radio communications ciphers by Polish cryptographers played a great role in the victory .
The advance of Budyonny 's 1st Cavalry Army toward Lwów was halted , first at the battle of Brody -LRB- July 29 August 2 -RRB- , and then on August 17 at the Battle of Zadwórze , where a small Polish force sacrificed itself to prevent Soviet cavalry from seizing Lwów and stopping vital Polish reinforcements from moving toward Warsaw .
Moving through weakly defended areas , Budyonny 's cavalry reached the city of Zamość on 29 August and attempted to take it in the battle of Zamość ; however , he soon faced an increasing number of Polish units diverted from the successful Warsaw counteroffensive .
On August 31 , Budyonny 's cavalry finally broke off its siege of Lwów and attempted to come to the aid of Soviet forces retreating from Warsaw .
The Soviet forces were intercepted and defeated by Polish cavalry at the Battle of Komarów near Zamość , the largest cavalry battle since 1813 and one of the last cavalry battles in history .
Although Budyonny 's army managed to avoid encirclement , it suffered heavy losses and its morale plummeted .
The remains of Budyonny 's 1st Cavalry Army retreated towards Volodymyr Volynskyi on 6 September and was defeated shortly thereafter at the Battle of Hrubieszów .
Tukhachevsky managed to reorganize the eastward retreating forces and in September established a new defensive line running from the Polish Lithuanian border to the north to the area of Polesie , with the central point in the city of Grodno in Belarus .
The Polish Army broke this line in the Battle of the Niemen River .
Polish forces crossed the Niemen River and outflanked the Bolshevik forces , which were forced to retreat again .
Polish forces continued to advance east on all fronts , repeating their successes from the previous year .
After the early October Battle of the Szczara River , the Polish Army had reached the Ternopil Dubno Minsk Drisa line .
In the south , Petliura 's Ukrainian forces defeated the Bolshevik 14th Army and on September 18 took control of the left bank of the Zbruch river .
During the next month they moved east to the line Yaruha on the Dniester Sharharod Bar Lityn .
Conclusion Soon after the Battle of Warsaw the Bolsheviks sued for peace .
The Poles , exhausted , constantly pressured by the Western governments and the League of Nations , and with its army controlling the majority of the disputed territories , were willing to negotiate .
The Soviets made two offers : one on 21 September and the other on 28 September .
The Polish delegation made a counteroffer on 2 October .
On the 5th , the Soviets offered amendments to the Polish offer which Poland accepted .
The armistice between Poland on one side and Soviet Ukraine and Soviet Russia on the other was signed on 12 October and went into effect on 18 October .
Long negotiations of the peace treaty ensued .
Meanwhile , Petliura 's Ukrainian forces , which now numbered 23,000 soldiers and which controlled territories immediately to the east of Poland , planned an offensive in Ukraine for November 11 but were attacked by the Bolsheviks on November 10 .
By November 21 , after several battles , they were driven into Polish controlled territory .
Breakaway The military governor of the Igbo dominated southeast , Colonel Odumegwu Ojukwu , citing the northern massacres and electoral fraud , proclaimed with southern parliament the secession of the south eastern region from Nigeria as the Republic of Biafra , an independent nation on 30 May 1967 .
Although there was much sympathy in Europe and elsewhere , only five countries recognized the new republic .
Several peace accords especially the one held at Aburi , Ghana -LRB- the Aburi Accord -RRB- collapsed and the shooting war followed .
Ojukwu managed at Aburi to get agreement to a confederation for Nigeria , rather than a federation .
He was warned by his advisers that this reflected a failure of Gowon to understand the difference and , that being the case , predicted that it would be reneged upon .
When this happened , Ojukwu regarded it as both a failure by Gowon to keep to the spirit of the Aburi agreement , and lack of integrity on the side of Nigeria Military Government in the negotiations toward a united Nigeria .
Gowon 's advisers , to the contrary , felt that he had enacted as much as was politically feasible in fulfilment of the spirit of Aburi .
Civil War The Nigerian government launched a `` police action '' to retake the secessionist territory .
The war began on 6 July 1967 when Nigerian Federal troops advanced in two columns into Biafra .
The Nigerian army offensive was through the north of Biafra led by Colonel Shuwa and the local military units were formed as the 1st Infantry Division .
The division was led mostly by northern officers .
The right hand Nigerian column advanced on the town of Nsukka which fell on 14 July , while the left hand column made for Garkem , which was captured on 12 July .
At this stage of the war , the other regions of Nigeria -LRB- the West and Mid West -RRB- still considered the war as a confrontation between the north -LRB- mainly Hausas -RRB- against the east -LRB- mainly Igbos -RRB- .
But the Biafrans responded with an offensive of their own when , on 9 July , the Biafran forces moved west into the Mid Western Nigerian region across the Niger river , passing through Benin City , till they were stopped at Ore -LRB- in present day Ondo State -RRB- just over the state boundary on 21 August , just 130 miles east of the Nigerian capital of Lagos .
The Biafran attack was led by Lt. Col. Banjo with the Biafran rank of brigadier .
The attack met little resistance and the Mid West was easily taken over .
This was due to the pre secession arrangement that all soldiers should return to their regions to stop the spate of killings , in which Igbo soldiers had been major victims .
The Nigerian soldiers that were supposed to defend the Mid West state were mostly Mid West Igbo and were in touch with their eastern counterpart .
General Gowon responded by asking Colonel Murtala Mohammed to form another division -LRB- the 2nd Infantry Division -RRB- to expel the Biafrans from the Mid West , as well as defend the West side and attack Biafra from the West as well .
Colonel Murtala later became military head of state .
As Nigerian forces retook the Mid West , the Biafran military administrator declared the Republic of Benin on 19 September .
Although Benin City was retaken by the Nigerians on 22 September , the Biafrans succeeded in their primary objective by tying down as many Nigerian Federal troops as much as they could .
Gen. Gowon also launched an offensive into Biafra south from the Niger Delta to the riverine area using the bulk of the Lagos Garrison command under Colonel Benjamin Adekunle -LRB- called the Black Scorpion -RRB- to form the 3rd Infantry Division -LRB- which was later renamed as the 3rd Marine Commando which was made up of the Nigerian marines -RRB- .
As the war continued , the Nigerian Army recruited amongst a wider area , including the Yoruba and Edo .
Four battalions of the Nigerian 2nd Infantry Division were needed to drive the Biafrans back and eliminate their territorial gains made during the offensive .
The Nigerians were repulsed three times as they attempted to cross the River Niger during October , resulting in the loss of thousands of troops , dozens of tanks and equipment .
The first attempt by the 2nd Infantry Division on 12 October to cross the Niger from the town of Asaba to the Biafran city of Onitsha cost the Nigerian Federal Army over 5,000 soldiers killed , wounded , captured or missing .
However , reorganization of the Nigerian forces , the reluctance of the Biafran army to attack again , and the effects of the Nigerian naval , land and air blockade of Biafra led to a change in the balance of forces .
Stalemate From 1968 onward , the war fell into a form of stalemate , with Nigerian forces unable to make significant advances into the remaining areas of Biafran control .
But another Nigerian offensive from April to June 1968 began to close the ring around the Biafrans with further advances on the two northern fronts and the capture of Port Harcourt on 19 May 1968 .
The blockade of the surrounded Biafrans led to a humanitarian disaster when it emerged that there was widespread civilian hunger and starvation in the besieged Igbo areas .
The Biafran government claimed that Nigeria was using hunger and genocide to win the war , and sought aid from the outside world .
A Nigerian commission , including British doctors from the Liverpool University School of Tropical Medicine , visited Biafra after the war and concluded that the evidence of deliberate starvation was overplayed , caused by confusion between the symptoms of starvation and various tropical illnesses .
While they did not doubt that starvation had occurred , it was less clear to what extent it was a result of the Nigerian blockade or the restriction of food to the civilians -LRB- to make it available to the military -RRB- by the Biafran government Many volunteer bodies organised blockade breaking relief flights into Biafra , carrying food , medicines , and sometimes -LRB- according to some claims -RRB- weapons .
More common was the claim that the arms carrying aircraft would closely shadow aid aircraft , making it more difficult to distinguish between aid aircraft and military supply aircraft .
It has been argued that by prolonging the war the Biafran relief effort -LRB- characterized by Canadian development consultant Ian Smillie as `` an act of unfortunate and profound folly '' -RRB- , contributed to the deaths of as many as 180,000 civilians .
The Nigerian government also claimed that the Biafran government was hiring foreign mercenaries to extend the war .
A group of veterans from the State of Katanga rebellion and French Foreign legionnaires were flown into Biafra , but most returned when it became obvious the cause was lost .
Only German born Rolf Steiner a Lt. Col. with the 4th Commandos , and Major Taffy Williams , a Welshman would remain for the duration .
Nigeria also used ` mercenaries ' , in the form of Egyptian pilots for their air force MiG 17 fighters and Il 28 bombers .
The Egyptians conscripts frequently attacked civilian rather than military targets , bombing numerous Red Cross shelters .
Bernard Kouchner was one of a number of French doctors who volunteered with the French Red Cross to work in hospitals and feeding centres in besieged Biafra .
The Red Cross required volunteers to sign an agreement , which was seen by some -LRB- like Kouchner and his supporters -RRB- as being similar to a gag order , that was designed to maintain the organization 's neutrality , whatever the circumstances .
Kouchner and the other French doctors signed this agreement .
After entering the country , the volunteers , in addition to Biafran health workers and hospitals , were subjected to attacks by the Nigerian army , and witnessed civilians being murdered and starved by the blockading forces .
Kouchner also witnessed these events , particularly the huge number of starving children , and when he returned to France , he publicly criticised the Nigerian government and the Red Cross for their seemingly complicit behavior .
With the help of other French doctors , Kouchner put Biafra in the media spotlight and called for an international response to the situation .
These doctors , led by Kouchner , concluded that a new aid organization was needed that would ignore political religious boundaries and prioritise the welfare of victims .
They created Médecins Sans Frontières in 1971 -LRB- Doctors Without Borders -RRB- .
In June 1969 , the Biafrans launched a desperate offensive against the Nigerians in their attempts to keep the Nigerians off balance .
They were supported by foreign mercenary pilots continuing to fly in food , medical supplies and weapons .
Most notable of the mercenaries was Swedish Count Carl Gustav von Rosen who led air attacks with five Malmö MFI 9 MiniCOIN small piston engined aircraft , armed with rocket pods and machine guns .
His BAF -LRB- Biafran Air Force -RRB- consisted of three Swedes , two Biafrans and an ex RCAF pilot .
From May to July , his small force attacked Nigerian military airfields in Port Harcourt , Enugu , Benin City and Ughelli , destroying or damaging a number of Nigerian Air Force jets used to attack relief flights , including a few Mig 17 's and three out of Nigeria 's six Ilyushin Il 28 bombers that were used to bomb Biafran villages and farms on a daily basis .
Although taken off guard by the surprise Biafran offensive , the Nigerians soon recovered and held off the Biafrans long enough for the offensive to stall out .
The Biafran air attacks did disrupt the combat operations of the Nigerian Air Force , but only for a few months .
One of the interesting characters assisting Count Carl Gustaf von Rosen was Lynn Garrison , an ex RCAF fighter pilot .
He introduced the Count to a Canadian method of dropping bagged supplies to remote areas in Canada without losing the contents .
He showed how one sack of food could be placed inside a larger sack before the supply drop .
When the package hit the ground the inner sack would rupture while the outer one kept the contents intact .
With this method many tons of food were dropped to many Biafrans who would otherwise have expired from starvation .
War 's End The Nigerian federal forces launched their final offensive against the Biafrans on 23 December 1969 with a major thrust by the 3rd Marine Commando Division -LRB- the division was commanded by Col. Obasanjo , who later became president twice -RRB- which succeeded in splitting the Biafran enclave into two by the end of the year .
The final Nigerian offensive , named `` Operation Tail Wind '' , was launched on 7 January 1970 with the 3rd Marine Commando Division attacking , and supported by the 1st Infantry division to the north and the 2nd Infantry division to the south .
The Biafran town of Owerri fell on 9 January , and Uli fell on 11 January .
The war finally ended with the final surrender of the Biafran forces in the last Biafra held town of Amichi on 13 January 1970 .
Only a few days earlier , Ojukwu fled into exile by flying by plane to the republic of Côte d'Ivoire , leaving his deputy Philip Effiong to handle the details of the surrender to Yakubu Gowon of the federal army .
After the war Gowon said , `` The tragic chapter of violence is just ended .
We are at the dawn of national reconciliation .
Once again we have an opportunity to build a new nation .
My dear compatriots , we must pay homage to the fallen , to the heroes who have made the supreme sacrifice that we may be able to build a nation , great in justice , fair trade , and industry . ''
Italian invasion On March 28 , 1935 , General Emilio De Bono was named as the Commander in Chief of all Italian armed forces in East Africa .
In addition , he was the Commander in Chief of the forces invading from Eritrea , the `` northern front '' .
De Bono had under his direct command a force of nine divisions in three Army Corps : The Italian I Corps , the Italian II Corps , and the Eritrean Corps .
General Rodolfo Graziani was De Bono 's subordinate .
He was the Commander in Chief of forces invading from Italian Somaliland , the `` southern front '' .
Initially he had two divisions and a variety of smaller units under his command .
His forces included a mix of Italians , Somalis , Eritreans , Libyans , and others .
De Bono regarded Italian Somaliland as a secondary theater that needed primarily to defend itself and possibly aid the main front with offensive thrusts if the enemy forces there were not too large .
As the invasion began , aircraft of the Royal Italian Air Force scattered fliers asking the population to rebel against Haile Selassie and support the `` true Emperor Iyasu V '' .
Forty year old Iyasu had been deposed many years earlier but was still in custody .
De Bono 's advance At precisely 5:00 am on October 3 , 1935 , De Bono crossed the Mareb River and advanced into Ethiopia from Eritrea without a declaration of war .
In response to the Italian invasion , Ethiopia declared war on Italy .
At this point in the campaign , roadways represented a serious drawback for the Italians as they crossed into Ethiopia .
On the Italian side , roads had been constructed right up to the border .
On the Ethiopian side , these roads often transitioned into vaguely defined paths .
On October 5 , the Italian I Corps took Adigrat and , by October 6 , Adwa was captured by the Italian II Corps .
Haile Selassie had ordered Duke -LRB- Ras -RRB- Seyoum Mangasha , the Commander of the Ethiopian Army of Tigre , to withdraw a day 's march away from the Magreb River .
Later , the Emperor ordered Commander of the Gate -LRB- Dejazmach -RRB- Haile Selassie Gugsa , also in the area , to move back fifty five and thirty five miles from the border .
On October 11 , Dejazmach Haile Selassie Gugsa and 1,200 of his followers surrendered to the commander of the Italian outpost at Adagamos .
De Bono notified Rome and the Ministry of Information promptly exaggerated the importance of the surrender .
Haile Selassie Gugsa was Emperor Haile Selassie 's son in law .
But less than a tenth of the Dejazmach 's army defected with him .
On October 14 , De Bono issued a proclamation ordering the suppression of slavery .
However , he was to write : `` I am obliged to say that the proclamation did not have much effect on the owners of slaves and perhaps still less on the liberated slaves themselves .
Many of the latter , the instant they are set free presented themselves to the Italian authorities , asking ` And now who gives me food ' ? ''
The Ethiopians themselves had attempted to abolish slavery .
Each Ethiopian Emperor since Tewodros II had issued proclamations to halt slavery , but without effect .
By October 15 , De Bono 's forces advanced from Adwa for a bloodless occupation of the holy capital of Axum .
General de Bono entered the city riding triumphantly on a white horse .
However , the invading Italians he commanded looted the Obelisk of Axum .
De Bono 's advance continued methodically , deliberately , and , to Mussolini 's consternation , slowly .
On November 8 , the I Corps and the Eritrean Corps captured Makale .
This proved to be the limit of how far the Italian invaders would get under the command of De Bono .
On November 16 , De Bono was promoted to the rank of Marshal of Italy -LRB- Maresciallo d'Italia -RRB- , but by December he was replaced with Marshal of Italy Pietro Badoglio because of the slow , cautious nature of De Bono 's advance .
Ethiopian Christmas Offensive Haile Selassie decided to test this new Italian commander with an offensive of his own .
What became known as the Ethiopian `` Christmas Offensive '' had as its objectives the splitting of the Italian forces in the north with the Ethiopian center , crushing the Italian left with the Ethiopian right , and invading Eritrea with the Ethiopian left .
Ras Seyoum Mangasha held the area around Abbi Addi with about 30,000 men .
Ras Imru Haile Selassie with approximately 40,000 men advanced from Gojjam toward Mai Timket to the left of Ras Seyoum .
Ras Kassa Haile Darge with approximately 40,000 men advanced from Dessie to support Ras Seyoum in the center in a push towards Warieu Pass .
Ras Mulugeta Yeggazu advanced from Dessie with approximately 80,000 men to take positions on and around Amba Aradam to the right of Ras Seyoum .
Amba Aradam was a steep sided , flat topped mountain directly in the way of an Italian advance on Addis Ababa .
The four commanders had approximately 190,000 men facing the Italians .
Ras Imru and his Army of Shire were on the Ethiopian left .
Ras Seyoum and his Army of Tigre and Ras Kassa and his Army of Beghemder were the Ethiopian center .
Ras Mulugeta and his `` Army of the Center '' -LRB- Mahel Sefari -RRB- were on the Ethiopian right .
A force of 1,000 Ethiopians crossed the Tekeze river and advanced toward the Dembeguina Pass .
The Italian commander , Major Criniti , commanded a force of 1,000 Eritrean Infantry supported by L3 tanks .
When the Ethiopians attacked , Criniti 's force fell back to the pass , only to discover that 2,000 Ethiopian soldiers had occupied it .
Criniti 's force was encircled and taking fire from all directions .
In the first Ethiopian attack , two of Major Criniti 's officers were killed , and Major Criniti was wounded .
Criniti 's force attempted to use their L3 tanks to break out , but the rough terrain immobilized the vehicles .
The Ethiopians slaughtered the infantry , then swarmed the tanks and killed their two man crews .
Italian forces organized a relief column made up of tanks and infantry to relieve Major Critini , but it ran into an Ethiopian ambush on the way .
The Ethiopians occupying the high ground rolled boulders in front of and behind the several of the tanks , immobilizing them .
The Ethiopians picked off the Italian infantry , and swarmed the tanks .
The other tanks were immobilized by the terrain and unable to advance further .
The Ethiopians set two of these tanks on fire .
Meanwhile , Major Critini achieved a breakout , having ordered his Eritreans to fix bayonets and charge .
Although half of the Major Critini 's force was killed in the fierce fighting , they managed to break out of the Ethiopian encirclement .
The Ethiopians claimed to have killed 3,000 Italian troops during the Christmas offensive .
Black period of the war During the Christmas Offensive , a time that informed circles in Italy termed the `` Black Period '' of the war , the Italians were forced to fall back from the Tekeze River to Axum and from Amba Tzellene to the Warieu Pass .
The ambitious Ethiopian plan called for Ras Kassa and Ras Seyoum to split the Italian army in two and isolate the Italian I Army Corps and the Italian III Army Corps in Makale .
Ras Mulugeta would then descend from Amba Aradam and crush both corps .
According to this plan , after Ras Imru retook Adwa , he was to invade Eritrea .
Hoare Laval In early December 1935 , the Hoare Laval Pact was proposed by Britain and France .
Under this pact , Italy would gain the best parts of Ogaden and Tigray .
Italy would also gain economic influence over all the southern part of Abyssinia .
Abyssinia would have a guaranteed corridor to the sea at the port of Assab ; however , the corridor was a poor one and known as a `` corridor for camels '' .
Mussolini was ready to agree to the pact , but he waited some days to make his opinion public .
On December 13 , details of the pact were leaked by a French newspaper and denounced as a sell out of the Abyssinians .
The British government disassociated itself from the pact and both the British and the French representatives associated with the pact were forced to resign .
Poison gas The Ethiopian offensive was ultimately stopped due to the superiority in modern weapons like machine guns and heavy artillery of the Italian forces .
More importantly , on December 26 Badoglio asked for and was given permission to use chemical warfare agents like mustard gas .
The Italians delivered the poison gas by special artillery canisters and with bombers of the Italian Royal Air Force .
While the poorly equipped Ethiopians experienced some success against modern weaponry , they did not understand the `` terrible rain that burned and killed . ''
Renewed Italian advance in the north As the progress of the Christmas Offensive slowed , Italian plans to renew the advance on the northern front got under way .
In addition to being granted permission to use poison gas , Badoglio received additional ground forces .
The elements of the Italian III Corps and the Italian IV Corps arrived in Eritrea during early 1936 .
On January 20 , the Italians resumed their northern offensive at the First Battle of Tembien in the broken terrain between the Warieu Pass and Makale .
The fighting proved inconclusive and , on January 24 , the battle ended in a draw , with the Italians having suffered 1,083 casualties and the Ethiopians 8,000 casualties .
But , for all intents and purposes , the threat posed by the Christmas Offensive was over .
The Ethiopians were never to split the Italian army and they were never to invade Eritrea .
While Graziani had already done so during the Battle of Genale Doria on the southern front , it was during the First Battle of Tembien that Badoglio unleashed on the northern front the indiscriminate use of mustard gas and phosgene as a primary weapon .
Speaking of the Ethiopian threat to Italian held Makale and the resultant use of poison gas , Haile Selassie said : It was at the time when the operations for the encircling of Makale were taking place that the Italian command , fearing a rout , followed the procedure which it is now my duty to denounce to the world .
Special sprayers were installed on board aircraft so that they could vaporize , over vast areas of territory , a fine , death dealing rain .
Groups of nine , fifteen , eighteen aircraft followed one another so that the fog issuing from them formed a continuous sheet .
It was thus that , as from the end of January 1936 , soldiers , women , children , cattle , rivers , lakes , and pastures were drenched continually with this deadly rain .
In order to kill off systematically all living creatures , in order to more surely poison waters and pastures , the Italian command made its aircraft pass over and over again .
That was its chief method of warfare .
In early February , the Italians captured Amba Aradam and destroyed Ras Mulugeta 's army in the Battle of Enderta .
The battle on the ground was lopsided in the Italians ' favor , but the Ethiopians managed to inflict significant casualties on the Italians , but themselves suffered heavy losses .
The heavy use of poison gas destroyed the vast majority of Ras Mulugeta 's army .
During the slaughter following the attempted withdrawal of his army , both Ras Mulugeta and his son were killed .
The Italians lost 800 killed and wounded while the Ethiopians lost 6,000 killed and 12,000 wounded .
In late February , the Italians destroyed the armies of Ras Kassa and Ras Seyoum at the Second Battle of Tembien .
Again poison gas played a major role in the destruction of the withdrawing armies .
In early March , the army of Ras Imru was attacked , bombed , and sprayed with poison gas in what was known as the Battle of Shire .
Despite resistance , the Italians successfully crushed his army .
The Italians had suffered 1,000 casualties and the Ethiopians 4,000 casualties .
On March 31 , 1936 at the Battle of Maychew , the Italians defeated an Ethiopian counteroffensive by the main Ethiopian army commanded by Emperor Haile Selassie .
The outnumbered Ethiopians could not overcome the well prepared Italian defenses .
For one day , the Ethiopians launched near non stop attacks on the Italian and Eritrean defenders , the exhausted Ethiopians withdrew .
The Italian Royal Air Force -LRB- Regia Aeronautica -RRB- finished off what was left of Haile Selassie 's army by attacking the survivors at Lake Ashangi with mustard gas .
The Italians had 400 casualties , the Eritreans 873 , and the Ethiopians 11,000 .
On April 4 , Haile Selassie looked with despair upon the horrific sight of the dead bodies of his army ringing the poisoned lake .
Southern front On October 3 , 1935 , Graziani implemented his `` Milan Plan '' .
The limited objectives of this plan were to remove Ethiopian forces from various frontier posts and to test the reaction to a series of probes all along the southern front .
While incessant rains worked to hinder the plan , within three weeks the villages of Kelafo , Dagnerai , Gerlogubi , and Gorahai were in Italian hands .
Late in the year , the initiative on the southern front went over to the Ethiopians as it had gone over to them on the northern front .
Ras Desta Damtu formed up his army in the area around Negele Boran with the goal of advancing on Dolo and invading Italian Somaliland .
Between January 12 and January 16 , 1936 , the Italians defeated his advancing and then withdrawing army during what became known as the Battle of Genale Doria .
In reality there was very little fighting on the ground as Graziani primarily used the Italian Air Force and poison gas to destroy Ras Desta 's army .
After a lull in February 1936 , the Italians in the south prepared a major thrust towards the city of Harar .
On March 22 , the Italian Air Force bombed Harar and Jijiga as a prelude .
Both cities were reduced to ruins even though Harar had been declared an `` open city . ''
On April 14 , Graziani launched his attack against Ras Nasibu Emmanual to defeat the last Ethiopian army left .
This attack was known as the Battle of the Ogaden .
The Ethiopians were drawn up behind a defensive line that was termed the `` Hindenburg Wall '' .
Ten days after the battle began , the last Ethiopian army had totally disintegrated .
2,000 Italian soldiers and 5,000 Ethiopian soldiers were killed or wounded .
On May 2 , Graziani requested permission from Mussolini to bomb Haile Selassie 's train when he found out that Haile Selassie had left Addis Ababa on the Imperial Railway .
Il Duce -LRB- `` The Leader '' -RRB- refused his request .
March of the Iron Will On April 26 1936 , when Badoglio launched his `` March of the Iron Will '' from Dessie to Addis Ababa , he faced no meaningful Ethiopian resistance .
Because of the lack of resistance , he risked an advance with a mechanized column .
Very early on May 2 , Haile Selassie boarded a train from Addis Ababa to Djibouti on the Imperial Railway .
From there he fled to England and into exile .
Prior to his departure , Haile Selassie ordered that the government of Ethiopia be moved to Gore , he ordered that the mayor of Addis Ababa maintain order in the city until the Italian arrival , and he appointed Ras Imru Haile Selassie as his Prince Regent during his absence .
The city police , under Abebe Aregai , and the remainder of the Imperial Guard did their utmost to restrain a growing and ever more restless mob .
But , on the first day , attempts to maintain order were abandoned .
Soon rioters took control .
They rampaged throughout the city ; looting and setting fire to shops owned by Europeans .
Badoglio 's force marched into Addis Ababa on May 5 and restored order .
While there never was a formal surrender , the Second Italo Abyssinian War was over .
The end Italian perspective : `` Will you be worthy of it ? ''
King Emperor Victor Emmanuel III waited for the crowds in the Quirinal Palace on Quirinal Hill .
Months earlier , when the Ethiopian adventure first started , he told a friend : `` If we win , I shall be King of Abyssinia .
If we lose , I shall be King of Italy . ''
`` Emperor !
Emperor !
Salute the Emperor ! ''
-LRB- `` Imperatore !
Imperatore !
Salute Imperatore ! '' -RRB-
chanted the crowd when Victor Emmanuel , in full Army uniform , showed himself on a balcony .
The first Roman Emperor in 1,460 years raised his withered hand to the visor of his cap and said nothing .
Elena , his Queen Empress did not appear .
She was in bed with a broken toe from falling off a stepladder in her library while reaching for a book .
While the Italian King Emperor was silent , the Italian Fascist dictator Benito Mussolini was not .
When victory was announced by Mussolini from the balcony of the Palazzo Venezia in Rome , the Italian population was jubilant .
Of course , the crowds in the Piazza Venezia had not been informed of the use of mustard gas by Italian troops .
From his balcony , Mussolini proclaimed : `` During the thirty centuries of our history , Italy has known many solemn and memorable moments this is unquestionably one of the most solemn , the most memorable .
People of Italy , people of the world , peace has been restored . ''
The crowds would not let him go ten times they recalled Mussolini to the balcony and cheered and waved while the boys of various Fascist youth organizations sang the newly composed ` Hymn of the Empire ' -LRB- Inno dell ` impero -RRB- . ''
Four days later , the same scene was repeated when Il Duce in a speech about the `` shining sword '' and the `` fatal hills of Rome '' announced : `` At last Italy has her empire . ''
And he then added : `` The Italian people have created an empire with their blood .
They will fertilize it with their work .
They will defend it against anyone with their weapons .
Will you be worthy of it ? ''
This was Mussolini 's hour of glory .
He knew that the Italian nation was united around him as it never was before .
He knew that the exultation that he witnessed was genuine .
And the Italian people appeared to have good cause for rejoicing .
Italy gained a vast territory and untold mineral riches ... riches much magnified by Italian propaganda .
Fascism was never so popular and the shouts of military victory drowned out the muttered grumbles about underlying economic ills .
Ethiopian perspective : `` It will be you tomorrow '' While the Italian people were rejoicing in Rome , Haile Selassie was crossing the Red Sea in the British cruiser HMS Enterprise .
On May 4 , he had sailed from Djibouti .
The British Mandate of Palestine was his destination on his way to England via Gibraltar .
Two days after his arrival in Jerusalem , Haile Selassie sent a telegram to the League of Nations in which he wrote : `` We have decided to bring to an end the most unequal , most unjust , most barbarous war of our age , and have chosen the road to exile in order that our people will not be exterminated and in order to consecrate ourselves wholly and in peace to the preservation of our empire 's independence ... we now demand that the League of Nations should continue its efforts to secure respect for the covenant , and that it should decide not to recognize territorial extensions , or the exercise of an assumed sovereignty , resulting from the illegal recourse to armed force and to numerous other violations of international agreements . ''
The Ethiopian Emperor 's telegram caused several nations to temporarily defer recognition of the Italian conquest .
On June 30 , Haile Selassie spoke at the League of Nations and was introduced by the President of the Assembly as `` His Imperial Majesty , the Emperor of Ethiopia '' -LRB- `` Sa Majesté Imperiale , l'Empereur d'Ethiopie '' -RRB- .
In response , a group of jeering Italian journalists began yelling insults and had to be ejected before he could speak .
The Romanian Chairman , Nicolae Titulescu , famously reacted to the buffoonery exhibited by the Italian journalists .
He jumped to his feet and shouted : `` To the door with the savages ! ''
-LRB- `` A la porte les sauvages ! '' -RRB-
Haile Selassie then gave a stirring speech denouncing Italy 's actions and criticizing the world community for standing by .
At the conclusion of his speech which appeared on newsreels throughout the world , he warned that : `` It is us today .
It will be you tomorrow . ''
International response The international response to the Italian invasion was mixed .
As stirring as Haile Selassie 's speech before the League of Nations was , his resolution for the world body to deny recognition of the Italian conquest was defeated .
In addition , he was not granted a loan to finance a resistance movement .
German dictator Adolf Hitler supported the Italian invasion before it was launched .
On November 18 , 1936 , the Italian Empire was officially recognized by the Empire of Japan .
In 1938 , France and Britain recognized Italian control over Ethiopia .
When the agreement was signed by Britain and Italy which recognized Italian control , Conservative politician Winston Churchill called it `` a complete triumph for Mussolini . ''
The United States never recognized Italian sovereignty over Ethiopia .
